 Aung San Suu Kyi is no longer a peace campaigner … it is cowardice and moral bankruptcy on Rohingyas 


India is facing growing pressure from international humanitarian groups for its hardline position on Rohingya refugees fleeing a crackdown on them by Myanmar’s military. Azeem Ibrahim, research professor at Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, is author of ‘The Rohingyas: Inside Myanmar’s Hidden Genocide’. He spoke to Pratigyan Das about whether Aung San Suu Kyi should return her Nobel prize for not standing up for Myanmar’s minorities, India’s security-focussed response to the crisis and why it matters:
Why is Aung San Suu Kyi unwilling to take action to save the Rohingyas?

Suu Kyi is no longer a peace campaigner. As a politician, she doesn’t want to antagonise either the military or the Buddhist clergy. She has made a critical calculation not to speak on this issue. In fact, she has gone much further by blaming both sides for the violence. It is very unfortunate, like saying both Nazis and Jews are to be blamed for the Holocaust or blacks and whites are equally responsible for apartheid in South Africa. For me and her supporters, it is cowardice and moral bankruptcy of the highest order on the Rohingya issue.

Do you think she should return her Nobel prize for failing to take any action?

No, I don’t think so because the Nobel prize is awarded to people for their past works and current works. Her past works have been commendable for fighting the military and bringing her country into a democratic space. But her present stand, where she tells BBC that there is no ethnic cleansing in her country is unfortunate because the world knows the reality.

Do you think the international community is doing enough to resolve this crisis?

Unfortunately, the international community is doing nothing on this issue. The international community has completely ignored the situation despite it being a humanitarian crisis. Bangladesh is struggling to feed its own countrymen.

The UN has passed a number of sanctions, a number of measures. There has to be some penalty on Myanmar from the international community and UN. The number of refugees is astronomical. The international community should ensure they go back to Myanmar as they belong to that nation.

How do you view India’s response to this issue?

I was really disappointed by PM Narendra Modi’s response on Rohingyas when he met Suu Kyi recently. It wasn’t expected from the leader of the world’s largest democracy. In fact, India should put pressure on Myanmar to stop this genocide against the Rohingyas as India is also bearing the brunt of these refugees. India has its own problems and shouldn’t be taking refugees from Myanmar.

What is the Rohingya problem all about?

The Rohingyas have been described by the UN as one of the most persecuted minorities to date. The problem goes back to the Second World War when the Japanese invaded Burma. The Rohingya minority stayed loyal to the British while the majority Buddhist population supported the Japanese as they believed this would lead to independence. But the war was won by the British.

After Burma became independent in 1948, animosity between the two communities grew. The situation deteriorated after the 1962 military coup by General Ne Win. He tried to implement what he called the Burmese road to socialism with a communist manifesto. His regime was an economic disaster. He did what military rulers normally do: blame it on the minorities. Rohingyas were the minorities – they had a different colour, language and religion. He started saying only Buddhists are the real nationalists. He stripped Rohingyas of their citizenship and waged violence against them. The animosity grew since then.

What is behind the current mass exodus?

According to the UN, in the last few weeks around 3,00,000 Rohingya have crossed the border and migrated to Bangladesh and other countries. The reason is that the Myanmar government and military don’t recognise the Rohingyas as an indigenous population. They want them to leave Myanmar and go to a third country. They believe Rohingyas are illegal migrants who came from Bangladesh in 1942 and are not original descendants of the land.

This is entirely false. A document in the Indian national archive in New Delhi about surveys done in 1824 clearly talks about Rohingya aborigines.

The Myanmar government believes only Buddhists can be loyal citizens of Myanmar. Myanmar doesn’t follow the Dalai Lama type of peaceful Buddhism. It follows a militant form of it. It encourages an ideology where all other religions and ideologies have to be suppressed and checked for Buddhism to thrive. They believe that the Rohingyas are the reincarnation of snakes and insects.
